---
title: 'BEng Thesis: PATBLC'
subtitle: 'Mechatronics, Optics, Computer Vision, Control, LabVIEW'
date: 2019-04-25 10:05:55 +0300
description: Pointing and Tracking Device for Bidirectional Laser Communication (PATBLC MKI), supervised by Dr. Aristides Kiprakis at The University of Edinburgh. Supports Dr. Kiprakis' SquidROV by granting it submerged wireless communication. Awarded 'Best BEng Thesis' for the class of 2019.
featured_image: '/images/Projects/beng-thesis/thumb.png'
---

## Project Overview

This project supports Dr. Aristides Kiprakis' SquidROV by granting it wireless communication abilities. This first iteration was successfully prototyped for dry-land use, but is designed with waterproofing in mind, and the report details suggestions for progression. The Pointing and Tracking Device for Bidirectional Laser Communication (PATBLC) performed well, with a link-closing time of 0.23s/60-degrees and $85\%$ accuracy over 20 trials for a target situated 500mm from the end-effector. Accuracy over various distances could not be measured due to noise limitations as well as the lack of a second system. Some of the future-work recommendations include the implementation of an instrumentation amplifier for measurement noise reduction, and the use of a more powerful controller to extend the target identification range beyond the current 870mm.


### Computer Vision

### Inverse Kinematics & Control

### Optics


The system is comprised of 3D printed components whose links are actuated by perpendicular revolute joints via servo motors which allow it to achieve a half-spherical workspace at the end-effector. Inverse Kinematics is implemented to control the restricted motors by flipping the end-effector for one quarter-sphere of the workspace. An ease-out function is used to dampen the motors' response near their commanded targets as the MG996R servos used - while cost-effective - produced too much torque for the weight of the system.

The system is comprised mostly of 3D printed components and is actuated by two Tower Pro
MG996R servo motors mounted perpendicularly to achieve a half-spherical workspace for the
End-Effector. Inverse Kinematics is implemented to control the restricted motors whereby
the End-Effector is flipped during one quarter-sphere of said workspace. The motors used here
produce too much torque for the PATBLC, but were the only cost-effective option. Their torque
is limited by using an ease-out function to dampen the motors’ response near their commanded
targets.

The End-Effector houses an optical breadboard carrying a laser, a dichroic mirror, a focus lens
and a receiver - although the focus lens was not received for this prototype. The system sending
the blue laser houses a short-pass dichroic mirror to pass its own beam out of the End-Effector
and to reflect its twin system’s beam onto its photodiode receiver for data reception. The
alternate system uses a long-pass dichroic mirror and a red beam. A green beam was originally
intended, but it was not possible to find one below the laser class III, which is unsuitable for
un-enclosed use at the university.

The computer vision algorithm uses elliptical shape detection coupled with a Kalman Filter for
skew and occlusion-resistant-tracking. The system is programmed in LabVIEW using a Queued
Message Handler design pattern to actuate Queued State Machines. Unfortunately, only one
camera was received, so only one system was built at this time.